README.md, before:

# Quake III Arena - webxdc edition

This is a [webxdc](https://webxdc.org) (in-chat mini-apps) port
of the 1999 first-person shooter Quake III Arena,
with multiplayer support.

![Windows desktop screenshot with two windows. One is Delta Chat messenger with the "Gamers" chat open, one message says "We gamin?" and the attachment is "Quake III Arena app". The other window is titled "Quake III Arena - Gamers" and it shows the shooter game with two players.](https://github.com/WofWca/quake3.xdc/blob/screenshot/screenshot.png)

## Usage

1. Install [Delta Chat](https://delta.chat) (or another messenger
   that supports [webxdc](https://webxdc.org)).
2. Download [the bundled `.xdc` file](https://github.com/WofWca/quake3.xdc/releases/latest/download/quake3.xdc).
   Alternatively, download from the [webxdc store](https://webxdc.org/apps/#wofwca-quake3).
   (The file is just a `.zip` archive renamed to `.xdc`).
3. Open the Delta Chat messenger.
4. Create a Delta Chat account (it will not ask you for your email or phone!).
5. Send the `.xdc` file to your friend.
6. Launch the resulting app.
7. Following the in-app instructions,
   download
   [the game data archive](https://archive.org/download/tucows_286139_Quake_III_Arena/linuxq3ademo-1.11-6.x86.gz.zip/linuxq3ademo-1.11-6.x86.gz.sh).
8. Select the archive in the app's file picker.
9. Wait for your friend to do the same, starting from step 6 (launch the app).
10. Frag!

## How this project has been made

To be precise, this port is based on the "The Longest Yard" project
(a browser version of Quake III with multiplayer),
which is hosted here https://thelongestyard.link/
([source code](https://github.com/jdarpinian/ioq3)).
That project is, in turn, based on https://ioquake3.org/
(https://github.com/ioquake/ioq3/)  
and HumbleNet (https://github.com/jdarpinian/HumbleNet).

The project is not made in a maintainable way.
Initially it was intended as just a prototype
but it seems to work well enough.

So, how it was made:

1. Go to https://thelongestyard.link.
2. Click "Play Multiplayer".
3. Save the page (Ctrl + S).
4. Download remaining assets manually.
5. Launch a local HTTP server (e.g. `python3 -m http.server`)
   and make sure that multiplayer and single-player works.
   Your browser will still connect to the signaling server
   of the original website and perform WebRTC P2P connection.
   We'll get rid of this later.

   This corresponds to the first commit in this repository.

6. Polyfill (mock) browser WebRTC API
   to use [webxdc.joinRealtimeChannel](https://webxdc.org/docs/spec/joinRealtimeChannel.html)
   as the transport.
   See the second commit in this repository.
7. Mock the WebSocket connection to the HumbleNet signaling server.
   See the third commit.
   The messages can be hard-coded, they only depend
   on whether the current app instance is gonna be the server or a client.
8. Get rid of other minor dependencies on direct internet connection.
   See commit history.

Update 2025-11: now we use a forked version of thelongestyard.link.
From now on the development steps are as follows:

1. Download a "web" (Emscripten) build from
   <https://github.com/WofWca/ioq3/tree/revert-more-stuff>.
   It's a forked version with some stuff reverted,
   namely `cl_autoAttack` and the "ztm-flexible-hud" mod.
   Those extra changes appear to have made the engine (`.wasm`)
   incompatible with other mods.
2. Upack the `.wasm32.js` and `.wasm32.wasm` files here.
3. Download the `QVM.zip` artifact from
   <https://github.com/WofWca/baseq3a/tree/baseq3a-free-version-and-my-stuff>.
   This is a version of the "baseq3a" mod with non-free assets removed
   and with some of our patches.
   You may also use the free version, with no extra patches:
   <https://github.com/ec-/baseq3a/pull/59>.
4. Extract `pak8a.pk3` from `QVM.zip` here.

2. We also are using a file explorer ui for the Emscripten Filesystem API, so users can edit some files and mod the game.
   1. Copy the .iife.js file from the dist folder of the [emscripten-fs-file-explorer-ui](https://www.npmjs.com/package/emscripten-fs-file-explorer-ui) npm package and use it in one of the html files following the npm package instructions.
   2. Copy the .js file from the [webxdc-download-polyfill](https://codeberg.org/DavidSM100/webxdc-download-polyfill) repo and link it to the html, this fixes download links issues in webxdc context (download links are used in the file explorer to export files)

And here is some extra stuff:

1. Add "Change Map" in-game menu item for the demo version

   1. Download the Linux build artifact from this branch
      https://github.com/WofWca/flexible-hud-for-ioq3/tree/add-menu-item-start-new-arena-ztm-flexible-hud.
      The branch is based on this MR:
      https://github.com/clover-moe/mint-arena/pull/7.
   2. Find the `vm` directory in the build files.
   3. Make another .zip file and add the `vm` directory to it.
   4. Replace `ztm-flexible-hud.pk3` with the new `.zip` file.

   If you don't want the "Change Map" button, you can use
   the original (non-forked) version of the mod:
   <https://clover.moe/flexible-hud-for-ioq3>.

### Why it's terribly made

- HumbleNet is not really needed.
  Because it works on top of WebRTC,
  and then we mock WebRTC API to make it work on top of webxdc instead.
- We should have properly forked https://github.com/jdarpinian/ioq3
  and implemented a build CI,
  instead of just saving the bundled website assets.

## Is this project any better than ioquake3 or thelongestyard.link?

Not really.

If you are already using a native version of [ioquake3](https://ioquake3.org/)
or <https://thelongestyard.link> and are happy with it,
then there is no need to migrate to this [webxdc](https://webxdc.org) version.
In fact, you should expect higher ping in the webxdc version,
due to the reliability layer overhead of the transport that it uses.
Unreliable + unordered transport is not yet available in Delta Chat,
but it is being considered, as of 2025-05.

This project is simply a version of <https://thelongestyard.link>
that is a little more convenient to run if you're already using
[Delta Chat](https://delta.chat) or another messenger
that supports [webxdc](https://webxdc.org).

Commit message:

feat: add Open Arena
This can let you start playing the game
without having to upload any files, i.e. be self-contained.

README.md, after:

# Quake III Arena - webxdc edition

This is a [webxdc](https://webxdc.org) (in-chat mini-apps) port
of the 1999 first-person shooter Quake III Arena,
with multiplayer support.

![Windows desktop screenshot with two windows. One is Delta Chat messenger with the "Gamers" chat open, one message says "We gamin?" and the attachment is "Quake III Arena app". The other window is titled "Quake III Arena - Gamers" and it shows the shooter game with two players.](https://github.com/WofWca/quake3.xdc/blob/screenshot/screenshot.png)

## Usage

1. Install [Delta Chat](https://delta.chat) (or another messenger
   that supports [webxdc](https://webxdc.org)).
2. Download [the bundled `.xdc` file](https://github.com/WofWca/quake3.xdc/releases/latest/download/quake3.xdc).
   Alternatively, download from the [webxdc store](https://webxdc.org/apps/#wofwca-quake3).
   (The file is just a `.zip` archive renamed to `.xdc`).
3. Open the Delta Chat messenger.
4. Create a Delta Chat account (it will not ask you for your email or phone!).
5. Send the `.xdc` file to your friend.
6. Launch the resulting app.
7. Following the in-app instructions,
   download
   [the game data archive](https://archive.org/download/tucows_286139_Quake_III_Arena/linuxq3ademo-1.11-6.x86.gz.zip/linuxq3ademo-1.11-6.x86.gz.sh).
8. Select the archive in the app's file picker.
9. Wait for your friend to do the same, starting from step 6 (launch the app).
10. Frag!

## How this project has been made

To be precise, this port is based on the "The Longest Yard" project
(a browser version of Quake III with multiplayer),
which is hosted here https://thelongestyard.link/
([source code](https://github.com/jdarpinian/ioq3)).
That project is, in turn, based on https://ioquake3.org/
(https://github.com/ioquake/ioq3/)  
and HumbleNet (https://github.com/jdarpinian/HumbleNet).

The project is not made in a maintainable way.
Initially it was intended as just a prototype
but it seems to work well enough.

So, how it was made:

1. Go to https://thelongestyard.link.
2. Click "Play Multiplayer".
3. Save the page (Ctrl + S).
4. Download remaining assets manually.
5. Launch a local HTTP server (e.g. `python3 -m http.server`)
   and make sure that multiplayer and single-player works.
   Your browser will still connect to the signaling server
   of the original website and perform WebRTC P2P connection.
   We'll get rid of this later.

   This corresponds to the first commit in this repository.

6. Polyfill (mock) browser WebRTC API
   to use [webxdc.joinRealtimeChannel](https://webxdc.org/docs/spec/joinRealtimeChannel.html)
   as the transport.
   See the second commit in this repository.
7. Mock the WebSocket connection to the HumbleNet signaling server.
   See the third commit.
   The messages can be hard-coded, they only depend
   on whether the current app instance is gonna be the server or a client.
8. Get rid of other minor dependencies on direct internet connection.
   See commit history.

Update 2025-11: now we use a forked version of thelongestyard.link.
From now on the development steps are as follows:

1. Download a "web" (Emscripten) build from
   <https://github.com/WofWca/ioq3/tree/revert-more-stuff>.
   It's a forked version with some stuff reverted,
   namely `cl_autoAttack` and the "ztm-flexible-hud" mod.
   Those extra changes appear to have made the engine (`.wasm`)
   incompatible with other mods.
   Additionally we enabled Opus codec support
   ([USE_CODEC_OPUS](https://github.com/ioquake/ioq3))
   so that we can bundle a smaller version of Open Arena
   with compressed sound (instead of the uncompressed `.wav`).
2. Upack the `.wasm32.js` and `.wasm32.wasm` files here.
3. Download the `QVM.zip` artifact from
   <https://github.com/WofWca/baseq3a/tree/baseq3a-free-version-and-my-stuff>.
   This is a version of the "baseq3a" mod with non-free assets removed
   and with some of our patches.
   You may also use the free version, with no extra patches:
   <https://github.com/ec-/baseq3a/pull/59>.
4. Extract `pak8a.pk3` from `QVM.zip` here.
<!-- TODO add stuff about Open Arena, how to make this small build. -->

2. We also are using a file explorer ui for the Emscripten Filesystem API, so users can edit some files and mod the game.
   1. Copy the .iife.js file from the dist folder of the [emscripten-fs-file-explorer-ui](https://www.npmjs.com/package/emscripten-fs-file-explorer-ui) npm package and use it in one of the html files following the npm package instructions.
   2. Copy the .js file from the [webxdc-download-polyfill](https://codeberg.org/DavidSM100/webxdc-download-polyfill) repo and link it to the html, this fixes download links issues in webxdc context (download links are used in the file explorer to export files)

And here is some extra stuff:

1. Add "Change Map" in-game menu item for the demo version

   1. Download the Linux build artifact from this branch
      https://github.com/WofWca/flexible-hud-for-ioq3/tree/add-menu-item-start-new-arena-ztm-flexible-hud.
      The branch is based on this MR:
      https://github.com/clover-moe/mint-arena/pull/7.
   2. Find the `vm` directory in the build files.
   3. Make another .zip file and add the `vm` directory to it.
   4. Replace `ztm-flexible-hud.pk3` with the new `.zip` file.

   If you don't want the "Change Map" button, you can use
   the original (non-forked) version of the mod:
   <https://clover.moe/flexible-hud-for-ioq3>.

### Why it's terribly made

- HumbleNet is not really needed.
  Because it works on top of WebRTC,
  and then we mock WebRTC API to make it work on top of webxdc instead.
- We should have properly forked https://github.com/jdarpinian/ioq3
  and implemented a build CI,
  instead of just saving the bundled website assets.

## Is this project any better than ioquake3 or thelongestyard.link?

Not really.

If you are already using a native version of [ioquake3](https://ioquake3.org/)
or <https://thelongestyard.link> and are happy with it,
then there is no need to migrate to this [webxdc](https://webxdc.org) version.
In fact, you should expect higher ping in the webxdc version,
due to the reliability layer overhead of the transport that it uses.
Unreliable + unordered transport is not yet available in Delta Chat,
but it is being considered, as of 2025-05.

This project is simply a version of <https://thelongestyard.link>
that is a little more convenient to run if you're already using
[Delta Chat](https://delta.chat) or another messenger
that supports [webxdc](https://webxdc.org).
